[Amit Varma]: I.V.M On December 2, 1977, two men walked out to
[Amit Varma]: the center of a cricket field to toss a coin. The venue was a VFL park in Melbourne, which
[Amit Varma]: had a capacity of 80,000 people. And yet there were only 500 spectators in this large ground.
[Amit Varma]: There was just one in-house photographer to record the moment. At the toss, when the coin
[Amit Varma]: finally hit the ground, you could probably have heard it in that silent, empty stadium.
[Amit Varma]: This was a match that was not recognized by the ICC, a match with few spectators. And
[Amit Varma]: yet it was the legend Garfield Sobers who was supervising the toss, and the two captains
[Amit Varma]: were Ian Chappell and Clive Lloyd. This was a day that cricket changed forever.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. My topic for today is money in cricket. And I will
[Amit Varma]: be examining this topic through the prism of World Series cricket and the IPL. My guests
[Amit Varma]: today are both legends of cricket writing, Gideon Hay and Prem Panicker. Gideon is an
[Amit Varma]: Australian cricket writer who has written more than 30 books. Many of them are about
[Amit Varma]: cricket, the rest about business and economics, which makes Kerry Packer's World Series an
[Amit Varma]: ideal subject for him, as it falls at the intersection of both. His first cricket book,
[Amit Varma]: The Cricket War, the inside story of Kerry Packer's World Series cricket, was released
[Amit Varma]: in 1993, and it was released in India in a new edition a few days ago. Prem Panicker
[Amit Varma]: needs no introduction to cricket lovers in India. He was probably the first blogger in
[Amit Varma]: the world, long before blogs even existed, with his cricket updates for Rediff in the
[Amit Varma]: mid-1990s. He is also an authority on media and on politics. And like me, he's followed
[Amit Varma]: the IPL very closely. I caught up with Gideon and Prem at the Bangalore Literature Festival
[Amit Varma]: last weekend, and recorded this episode with them there. Here we go.
[Amit Varma]: Gideon, Prem, welcome to the show. Nice to be here. Thank you. Thanks for having me.
[Amit Varma]: Gideon, I have in my hands right now your first book, The Cricket War, which is releasing
[Amit Varma]: now in India for the first time. A little bit light. It took a while to get here. Yeah,
[Amit Varma]: and you wrote it in the early 90s. Yes, it essentially covers World Series cricket and
[Amit Varma]: what Kerry Packer, how Kerry Packer transformed the game. And all of that is incredibly relevant
[Amit Varma]: even today because all those fundamental questions about the commercialization of the game, what
[Amit Varma]: it does to the spirit of the game, the way it is played and so on, are incredibly relevant
[Amit Varma]: no matter which side of the fence you fall upon. And you mentioned that, you know, when
[Amit Varma]: re-reading this book now, you felt that it was still incredibly relevant for what we
[Guest 2]: were doing through these books. Well, I mean, what does strike me when I reflect on World
[Guest 2]: Series cricket now is how incredibly audacious it was. If you think about where cricket was
[Guest 2]: in 1977, you had the occasion of the Centenary Test, which was the celebration of all good
[Guest 2]: things about Test cricket, honoring the fact that they had been the first Test match in
[Guest 2]: March 1877. It was a great pretext for self-congratulation about the stature that the game had achieved,
[Guest 2]: its place in the national life, its role in the Commonwealth, its upholding of certain
[Guest 2]: values that the people like to believe about the game as embodying. And then even as that
[Guest 2]: Test match was in progress, there was a private entrepreneur with a broadcasting company recruiting
[Guest 2]: the best cricketers in the world for his own roll-your-own television spectacular. There's
[Guest 2]: never been anything quite so audacious since then. And in the course of the next two years,
[Guest 2]: cricket would learn a great deal about the effects of the arrival of private capital.
[Guest 2]: It would receive a timely education in the value of commercial rights, which of course
[Guest 2]: has underpinned the game's growth for the subsequent four years. The players would get
[Guest 2]: a first feeling for their role as something other than mere athletes. They became celebrities,
[Guest 2]: if you like, for the first time. They became commercial properties to be bought and sold.
[Guest 2]: And for the first time, we saw the potential that was latent in one-day cricket, a new
[Guest 2]: variant on an old theme. There'd only really been relatively few one-day internationals
[Guest 2]: before World Series cricket. After World Series cricket, the format goes forth and multiplies,
[Amit Varma]: not least of all, in India.
[Amit Varma]: And just taking a tangent off before exploring further, do you believe in the great man theory
[Amit Varma]: of history? I mean, would this revolution have happened without Packer? Or is cricket
[Amit Varma]: in that sense, was he necessary for it?
[Guest 2]: I do think it was a bit of a perfect storm. It was a very unusual concatenation of circumstances
[Guest 2]: in 1977. A, you had a game that was very, very popular, and there's no doubt about it.
[Guest 2]: Cricket in 1977 was hugely popular. In Australia in particular, because it had this very vital,
[Guest 2]: gregarious, exciting team, Lillian Thompson, the Chapels, Marsh, et cetera, who felt nonetheless
[Guest 2]: alienated and underpaid and exploited by their administrators because they compared their
[Guest 2]: rewards to those that were available in individual sports, such as tennis and golf, which were
[Guest 2]: rapidly professionalizing off the back of television.
[Guest 2]: You had the rights for – the commercial and broadcasting rights for that cricket were
[Guest 2]: being significantly undersold. They were basically in the hands of a national broadcaster that
[Guest 2]: broadcast the game essentially on a kind of a grace and favor basis, I guess in much the
[Guest 2]: same way as Doordarshan had in India forever and a day.
[Guest 2]: You had a set of players who had a kind of an accumulation of about 10 years' worth of
[Guest 2]: grievances with their administrators and an administrative class that I think had become
[Guest 2]: dangerously separated by a generation and more from the attitudes of their players.
[Guest 2]: And you had certain stars, Dennis Leib notably and the Chapels, who had links in with people
[Guest 2]: in other pursuits. The important figures in World Series cricket are not simply Kerry
[Guest 2]: Packer and the players, but there are people like John Cornell and Austin Robertson and
[Guest 2]: Paul Hogan who played such an important part in bringing the players and Packer as an impresario
[Guest 2]: together.
[Guest 2]: I think that where Packer had a unique advantage was that he was quite a young man. He's only
[Guest 2]: 39 in 1977. He's trying to make his own way in the world out from under the influence
[Guest 2]: or the reputation of his late father who had been a great press baron, Sir Frank, in his
[Guest 2]: own right. He was looking not necessarily to make his name, but to create something
[Guest 2]: of his own. And he'd already revolutionised the magazine market in Australia by setting
[Guest 2]: up the first really significant sort of new wave women's magazine, Clio. And he was fascinated
[Guest 2]: by sport, the potential of sport to create lots of content throughout the year, relatively
[Guest 2]: cheap to produce, embroidered with natural ad breaks, which naturally captured the nation's
[Guest 2]: imagination. I don't think any single individual, with the possible exception of Rupert Murdoch
[Guest 2]: in Australia, could have had quite the same grand conception about the role of sport as
[Guest 2]: a kind of a commercial battering ram.
[Guest 2]: I think the players, too, tended to gravitate towards an individual, a compelling individual
[Guest 2]: such as Packer, rather than necessarily a faceless corporate enterprise, because players
[Guest 2]: naturally deferred to an inspirational authority. And the minute that Packer really had the
[Guest 2]: Chapels on their side, and Libby, who were such important opinion makers in their own
[Guest 2]: generation, it was inevitable, really, that all the players would follow. They were very
[Guest 2]: susceptible to the influence of these strongmen of Australian cricket at that time. Perhaps
[Guest 2]: these days, they might take a slightly more sort of individual and selfish attitude. But
[Guest 2]: then the Australian cricket team moved as a block, and they were kind of arm-in-arm
[Amit Varma]: from that point forward for the next few years.
[Amit Varma]: And they were sort of used to moving as a block, right? Because for the past few years,
[Amit Varma]: they had been fighting for higher wages.
[Guest 2]: They had, yes. It has this backdrop of kind of constant agitation about not just pay,
[Guest 2]: but also conditions, and prestige, and treatment. The touchstone that I know Ciapelli talks
[Guest 2]: about all the time is the 1970 tour of South Africa, where the Australian players were
[Guest 2]: playing it. They were on a double tour. They'd played against India. They'd come from India.
[Guest 2]: They'd beaten India at home, but it had been a terribly, terribly arduous tour. They went
[Guest 2]: to South Africa. They were smashed by a very great South African team. And the cricket
[Guest 2]: board tried to persuade them to play an extra test. And Ciapelli said, well, basically,
[Guest 2]: you have to get us to sign another contract, and we're not going to sign another contract.
[Guest 2]: And that was the first evidence that the players were capable of defying their administrators.
[Guest 2]: The administrators chose to back off in that confrontation. But it did give the players
[Guest 2]: a bit of a feeling for their power if they acted collectively.
[Guest 2]: We've actually, interestingly, we've seen further events of that during the recent pay
[Guest 2]: dispute in Australia, where the players did stick to one another, both the male and the
[Guest 2]: female players, international and domestic. And it proved that in the end, if you couldn't
[Guest 2]: break them, if you couldn't divide them, then they did have the opportunity to assert their
[Amit Varma]: will.
[Amit Varma]: And would you say that the players today have a much greater sense of what they're actually
[Amit Varma]: worth than perhaps a day back then?
[Guest 2]: Sure. But they also have, this was a bit of an education for us all in Australia recently.
[Guest 2]: I think that the belief had built up that players now looked after themselves individually.
[Guest 2]: Because of the way in which the IPL auction kind of carves up the players as individual
[Guest 2]: lots and sells them for different prices, that they somehow had a different attitude
[Guest 2]: to industrial relations. We learned a different lesson in Australia this summer, that the
[Guest 2]: players look at each other and they say, what are you doing? And if one of them says, we're
[Amit Varma]: sticking together, then that's what they tend to do. Still, even in this day and age.
[Amit Varma]: And they cater to the self-interest by doing that, because they're much likelier to get
[Amit Varma]: a good deal if they do collective bargaining.
[Amit Varma]: So what was the reaction to World Series cricket back then, among the general public, for example?
[Guest 2]: Well, I can recall my own action. I was an 11-year-old child who was massively excited
[Guest 2]: about cricket, really coming to terms with the game for the first time. And I was shocked.
[Guest 2]: I was shocked, appalled that the players would desert. All these things that I'd been told
[Guest 2]: were vitally important. Tradition, etiquette, the honour of representing your country, the
[Guest 2]: fact that the game was beyond price. To my prim 11-year-old sensibilities, that was a
[Guest 2]: gross affront. At the same time, part of me was absolutely fascinated by this new enterprise.
[Guest 2]: It was so different. It was so exciting. It was so colourful. It was so full of personality.
[Guest 2]: And it was another channel. How exciting to have cricket on two channels all of a sudden.
[Guest 2]: So over the course of the next two years, I probably went on the same kind of journey
[Guest 2]: as the Australian public in the sense that having gotten over my initial shock, I began
[Guest 2]: to see that there was value in this new kind of cricket, that it afforded opportunities
[Guest 2]: for greater remuneration for players, which no doubt they deserved. It was exciting. It
[Guest 2]: was accessible. It was innovative because for the first time we saw players playing
[Guest 2]: in helmets. We saw them playing under lights. We saw them playing in coloured clothes. We
[Guest 2]: saw a vastly enhanced television coverage. The kind of thing that we take these days
[Guest 2]: for granted, but really World Series Cricket is the first iteration of that evolution of
[Guest 2]: the game, which is more than simply being a kind of a silent, distant witness to the
[Guest 2]: game. Cameras for the first time kind of got close up to the action and really dwelt on
[Guest 2]: it and teased out all its possibilities and replayed endlessly from all conceivable angles.
[Guest 2]: We forget that Packer introduced the standard innovation of filming cricket from both ends.
[Guest 2]: Because when I started watching cricket in the mid-1970s, you saw it from one end only.
[Guest 2]: You saw it from behind the bowler's arm in one over and then from behind the batsman
[Guest 2]: in the next. And Packer said, well, I can't stand looking at batsmen's arses half the
[Guest 2]: time. I want to see it from behind the bowler's arm each time. And that's an amazing change
[Amit Varma]: of perspective.
[Amit Varma]: And it also underscores that this sport is one that is played for the audience. You want
[Amit Varma]: to give them the best experience. It's not just that the sport is happening and as a
[Amit Varma]: matter of fact, we're showing it to people. But the audience is at the centre of it. So
[Amit Varma]: that simple change always seems to epitomise that.
[Amit Varma]: So now my next question is sort of a multi-part question. What kind of changes did World Series
[Amit Varma]: Cricket kickstart in cricket in three aspects? One, the game itself, the way it was played.
[Amit Varma]: Two, the lives of all the stakeholders involved, players, administrators and so on. And three,
[Amit Varma]: in terms of cricket's place in the culture, because like you correctly said, it had a
[Amit Varma]: place in the culture that went beyond mere mindless entertainment. You know, you have
[Amit Varma]: phrases in the English language like, that's not cricket. You know, thereby it embodied
[Guest 2]: that set of values.
[Guest 2]: I'll start with the third one first, because I think that is the most interesting. It's
[Guest 2]: a very good quote from an Australian writer called Greg Manning, an academic, who said
[Guest 2]: that Packer didn't spend all that money to buy cricket. He spent that money turning cricket
[Guest 2]: into something that he could buy. For the first time, cricket was turned into a tradable
[Guest 2]: commodity. It was something that could be bought and sold. Players could be bought and
[Guest 2]: sold.
[Guest 2]: In a sense, that liberation of kind of animal spirits is something that we're still coming
[Guest 2]: to terms with. It did instil in players an idea that, you know, they were entities. They
[Guest 2]: were entities in a free market of entertainment who could sell themselves potentially to the
[Guest 2]: highest possible bidder. In some senses, it's almost impossible to conceive of the rebel
[Guest 2]: tours of the 1980s having gone ahead, if not for what had happened in 1977. It made players
[Guest 2]: think, okay, I'm only around for a short period of time. I should take advantage of whatever
[Guest 2]: opportunities come my way, and that pariah-hood can be survived, because for two years those
[Guest 2]: players were kind of non-persons in the eyes of the establishment game, and yet in 1979,
[Guest 2]: everything went back to the way it had been. The players for that short period had been
[Guest 2]: greatly enriched.
[Guest 2]: The first part of your question, what did it do to the game? Well, in some respects,
[Guest 2]: Packer was predominantly a great resurfacer of the game. He didn't sort of fundamentally
[Guest 2]: change the balance between bat and ball. He didn't invent a new kind of bowling. What
[Guest 2]: he did was he popularized a form of cricket that had already been explored by the establishment.
[Guest 2]: We'd already had the World Cup of 1975. We'd seen the pent-up potential of one-day cricket.
[Guest 2]: What we hadn't done was take full commercial advantage of it. Once it had been demonstrated
[Guest 2]: that people would turn up for innovations like night cricket, then the establishment
[Guest 2]: was able to take advantage of that. The interesting thing about the pact that Packer strikes with
[Guest 2]: the game in 1979 is that he gets an even better deal than he initially bargained on, because
[Guest 2]: PBL Marketing, his organization, becomes the official marketing arm of the Australian Cricket
[Guest 2]: Board. So he's basically getting to prepare his own attractions for television. He gets
[Guest 2]: a chance to participate in the creation of the marketing and the advertising that is
[Guest 2]: going to be screened on his own television network. That's an amazing power. In fact,
[Guest 2]: Channel 9 lost that power in the mid-1990s, but they held it for a long time. Packer was
[Guest 2]: really able to reshape cricket according to the priorities of his own television station.
[Guest 2]: That was a remarkable innovation. Broadcasters got a sense that they could influence kind
[Guest 2]: of on-field outcomes. They could influence the way in which the calendar was structured.
[Guest 2]: Because they were bringing such rewards to the game through commercial opportunities,
[Guest 2]: they had a say in the way in which cricket was run.
[Amit Varma]: Prem, let me turn to you now. You've been writing about cricket, covering cricket since
[Amit Varma]: the mid-1990s. Coincidentally, that also happens to be around the time the Indian Cricket Board
[Amit Varma]: and Indian Cricket began to discover its commercial potential, where suddenly it became mass-marketed
[Amit Varma]: entertainment. Players started earning a lot, which is a great thing. And then, you know,
[Amit Varma]: 10 years ago, we had the IPL come up. And that seems in many ways like the World Series
[Amit Varma]: and steroids. And we've both celebrated aspects of it and lamented aspects of it. So what
[Amit Varma]: do you feel about what you've seen in these years?
[Guest 1]: Well, one of the things that struck me about Gideon's exposition of how Packer changed
[Guest 1]: or brought an entirely new paradigm to cricket is the fact that there was thought behind
[Guest 1]: every single thing that was done. There was a set of circumstances that came together
[Guest 1]: to create both dissatisfaction and therefore an opportunity. And there was a person who
[Guest 1]: was smart enough to do the math, see the opportunity. And ultimately, as Gideon said, he ended up
[Guest 1]: gaining far more than he would have gained if they had listened to him in the first place.
[Guest 1]: I think the one thing that strikes me about Indian cricket, and that's true from even
[Guest 1]: before the 90s, but certainly true from the 90s on till very recently, and this includes
[Guest 1]: the inception of the IPL, is that there has never been any thought at any stage of development.
[Guest 1]: It is either that you've tripped over something and fallen into something and then realized
[Guest 1]: that you got lucky and fell with your face pointing the right way. Or you have been forced
[Guest 1]: by external circumstances to sort of, so an innovation has been to circumvent somebody
[Guest 1]: else from innovating. So the ICL, this became a preventive measure because you probably
[Guest 1]: know this because you were covering cricket at the same time, Lalit Modi had been speaking
[Guest 1]: about this forever. Since 1995. Yeah, even during the Dalmia regime, he had repeatedly
[Amit Varma]: gone and done presentations. In fact, I interviewed Bindra in I think 2002 or 2003 and that's
[Amit Varma]: when the cricket first started. But Bindra talked about it. He said there's this guy
[Amit Varma]: called Lalit Modi who's got this great idea. The interesting thing is there's a great photograph
[Amit Varma]: in this edition of his book, which is launching, which shows Subhash Chandra posing like a
[Amit Varma]: media baron, almost like an Indian packer. And in that sense, with ICL, he forced the
[Amit Varma]: issue because Lalit Modi and the BCCI was kind of sitting on the idea for a while. And
[Amit Varma]: then the ICL happened and it was a rebel league and all of these players joined and that forced
[Guest 1]: the issue and the BCCI. Yeah, which was kind of my point that it's always been, somebody's
[Guest 1]: always had to drag Indian cricket, kicking and screaming from one era into another, while
[Guest 1]: they drag their heels. I mean, that's true of the IPL, but even the period that you were
[Guest 1]: talking about of discovering the commercial properties, again, this completely happens
[Unknown]: to us. I mean, it was an egoistic bid that brought the World Cup to India in the first
[Guest 1]: place. It was not a commercial consideration. Having done that, you were desperately in
[Guest 1]: trouble. And then the whole Indian Jugaad system works, because somebody knows somebody
[Guest 1]: who knows the Ambani's, who at that point were trying to put a benign face at a time
[Guest 1]: when they were getting slammed for pretty much everything in Dhirubhai Ambani's time.
[Unknown]: And they realized that identifying with cricket was pretty much a passport.
[Guest 1]: That leads to the Reliance World Cup.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, it was a nice little whitewash and stuff like that. So they come in and money comes
[Guest 1]: in and it's always been said, sometimes the benign effects of something are in front of
[Guest 1]: their face and you find the BCC is still resisting it. Until somebody gives them a kick up the
[Amit Varma]: backside.
[Amit Varma]: Would it be fair to say that all of these changes, what World Series brought about and
[Amit Varma]: what has happened in India in the last few years were inevitable, except that Packer
[Amit Varma]: came slightly ahead of the curve and he forced the issue. And in India, they were bound to
[Amit Varma]: happen and they happened and they would have happened anyway, but there was no visionary
[Guest 1]: figure like Packer leading.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, for me, what is amusing about that whole thing is that, yeah, it was inevitable. The
[Guest 1]: set of circumstances or the set of disaffections that Gideon outlined had to erupt at some
[Guest 1]: point or the other, because you couldn't see a logical sequence where these things built
[Guest 1]: and what, I mean, it's not like Vapor just escaping. It had to result in an outburst.
[Guest 1]: It so happened that it was Packer who was poised and had the wit and the intelligence
[Guest 1]: to take advantage. But one way or the other, something had to happen. The funny thing about
[Guest 1]: it was, you know, forget about the changes in cricket and stuff like today, in the last
[Guest 1]: four or five years, say 10 years max, we fetishize a disruption. We have entire conferences that
[Guest 1]: are, for me, I mean, what Packer did, that was disruption. He took something that had
[Guest 1]: a history, it had a deep root in culture, in thing and he just said, I'm not tampering
[Guest 1]: with it. I'm just coming at it from another way, like Mac did with notebooks. They didn't
[Guest 1]: invent a computer. They didn't invent a different computer. They just made it friendlier.
[Amit Varma]: So you could say Packer uberized cricket.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, seriously. I mean, he was disruption before people started thinking of disruption
[Guest 1]: as a means of taking your business to the next level. And we are, yeah, like I said.
[Guest 2]: Few things are more ripe for disruption than a monopoly. You know, all national boards
[Guest 2]: are inherently monopolies. They arrogate to themselves the right to hold official cricket
[Guest 2]: within their territorial boundaries.
[Amit Varma]: Not just as monopsonies, because they can't sell their services anywhere else. And I,
[Guest 2]: you know, and I've written about this a lot and I can't figure out a solution to this
[Amit Varma]: because it's obviously undesirable. But what do you do about it? And the typical answer
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, fellow free marketers often give is that, look, you know, the BCCI may
[Amit Varma]: have a monopoly and a monopsony on cricket in India, but they are competing with other
[Amit Varma]: sports and other forms of entertainment. And that'll be the corrective that they need.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm not sure how good an answer that is, but it seems to be the best answer at this
[Amit Varma]: point. But that kind of brings me to this next question that just as cricket has changed,
[Amit Varma]: the world has also changed in the way we consume entertainment. And I'm loosely categorizing
[Amit Varma]: all sport as entertainment. Whatever we choose to do with our time as entertainment has changed.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, much as I'm a purist and I love Test cricket more than anything else. And
[Amit Varma]: it is true that the opportunity cost of Test cricket is very high in this day and age.
[Amit Varma]: Back in the day when you didn't have much to do with your time, watching a five-day
[Amit Varma]: Test match made sense. But today you have so many competing demands on your time, including
[Amit Varma]: on your smartphone where there's so much of addictive entertainment happening. Does Test
[Amit Varma]: cricket have a future? And was it inevitable that we are eventually going to make that
[Amit Varma]: journey from five-day cricket to one-day cricket to T10, T20 cricket?
[Guest 2]: Maybe even T10. That's the next stage, isn't it?
[Unknown]: Oh my God.
[Guest 2]: I know. It's barely bears thinking about, isn't it? I think that it's perfectly possible
[Guest 2]: to imagine that as a potential scenario. What we need to reflect on, I think, is what we
[Guest 2]: would lose in that process. And what we are losing in the extending of the short forms
[Guest 2]: of the game is the idea of the epic, the performance of scale, the idea of endurance, that dimension
[Guest 2]: that cricket has had that other sports do not, except when you see an epic five-setter
[Guest 2]: between Federer and Nadal. It wouldn't have been better as a three-setter or a two-setter,
[Guest 2]: would it? It actually needs that duration. It needs that rise and fall. It needs that
[Guest 2]: push and pull. You can't have everything proceeding in a series of explosive moments because explosive
[Guest 2]: moments, well, they impress themselves on the mind, but in a very disorganized way.
[Guest 2]: I mean, isn't it fascinating that you can still remember test matches that you saw in
[Guest 2]: the 1970s or the 1980s or the 1990s, but it's actually quite difficult to remember that
[Guest 2]: T20 hand that you saw last week. I think you need both. In an ideal world, you would have
[Guest 2]: a perfect balance between both, both the kind of the sugar hit that short form operates
[Guest 2]: and the more wholesome sustenance that I think the long form has. But you're right. I think
[Guest 2]: in the end, economics might be the ultimate determinant. You have to come up with some
[Guest 2]: sort of estimation of what you would lose economically. And I think there is a cost
[Guest 2]: to the fading value of Test Cricket. Test Cricket does anchor us. It does provide us
[Guest 2]: with a sense of continuity, a sense of generation or renewal. It provides the forum for players
[Guest 2]: to be great. T20 provides a forum for players to be spectacular and explosive and eye-catching
[Guest 2]: but it doesn't really allow us to study them at length and up close in all their manifestations
[Guest 2]: and to see the full range of their skills and the full complexities of the game. That
[Guest 2]: doesn't make it a bad form. That makes it a certain kind of cricket that if only that
[Guest 2]: kind of cricket was on offer, then the game would be somehow diminished.
[Amit Varma]: And also to take that forward, I'd say that a five-day test match is far richer than say
[Unknown]: a five-setter in tennis. Because the fifth set is really pretty similar to the first
[Amit Varma]: set in terms of your playing conditions and it's the same two players. You know, you could
[Amit Varma]: even interchange them sometimes. Obviously, there's a change in context. But the richness
[Amit Varma]: of a five-day test where a pitch is crumbling and you're fighting to, you know, chase 187
[Amit Varma]: against a good attack or, you know, the kind of drama and joy that say Gavaskar's last
[Amit Varma]: innings 96 against Pakistan on that spinning back brings. And there's really nothing in
[Amit Varma]: T20 cricket which can kind of capture that. But what is the value of that? And what is
[Amit Varma]: the price of that?
[Guest 1]: Yeah. So here's the thing, right? Gideon pretty much laid it out. And your question supplies
[Guest 1]: its own answer that we're increasingly trying to figure out. Yeah. Being in cricket track,
[Guest 1]: you should probably feel that somehow something must be done to preserve test cricket and
[Guest 1]: to encourage test cricket and stuff like that. And being pragmatic, you realize that it's
[Guest 1]: drawing fewer and fewer crowds and it's making lesser amounts of money every single time.
[Guest 1]: The logic, the economics, everything is making a very strong case for test cricket being
[Guest 1]: pretty much phased out of the equation. But counterintuitively, I'll try a hypothetical.
[Unknown]: What if there wasn't any issues with India and Pakistan or magically the issues had dissolved
[Unknown]: themselves last night. And we announced that India and Pakistan were going to play a five
[Guest 1]: test series in India starting next month. What do you think the crowds would be? What
[Guest 1]: do you think the money making potential would be? Where does that come from? It comes A
[Guest 1]: from the fact that it has a narrative, but that narrative was largely made by us. And
[Guest 1]: by us, I mean the boards, the organizers, the society, media, all of us, right? I mean,
[Unknown]: the narrative didn't exist otherwise. It didn't exist in a vacuum. The ashes which draws packed
[Guest 1]: houses even today, despite the fact that, you know, I mean, you have some landmark ashes
[Guest 1]: where the 2005 was lost. Really, you know, the storied ashes. I'm pretty certain that
[Guest 1]: this ashes, again, you will get a sellout crowd. The reason being, there is a strong
[Guest 1]: narrative that has been created by the marketing wing of cricket, by the administrative wing
[Guest 1]: of cricket, by the media, which is complicit in the manufacture of pretty much every single
[Guest 1]: narrative. We do not create similar narratives for such events outside of England plays Australia
[Guest 1]: and India's never want to play Pakistan in the conceivable future. So we're left with
[Guest 1]: a single narrative, which has to bear the entire burden of lifting cricket. And that's
[Amit Varma]: not it. And I'm left with a slight mixed feeling about this in the sense that I understand
[Amit Varma]: that if India plays Pakistan, that larger narrative of what the rivalry has been like
[Amit Varma]: plays a part in drawing a lot of people. But equally, it would seem that just the more
[Unknown]: basic narrative of these are the 11 players versus these 11 players and it's their skills
[Amit Varma]: out and their personal life histories sort of, you know, coming to this is also a fascinating
[Amit Varma]: narrative, which will simply, which will appeal to cricket tragics like us, perhaps, but not
[Guest 1]: precisely. But that particular narrative of 11 against 11 playing for two countries is
[Guest 1]: harder to sell. We haven't seen that narrative for any time in the last 20, 25 years. It's
[Guest 1]: always, there needs to be a trigger. India, Australia was, I mean, it was brilliant marketing
[Guest 1]: and it kicked off because of Sourav Ganguly came along at a time when you had a strong
[Guest 1]: will, Steve Waugh at the other end and Sourav played the, you know, imp who would tease
[Amit Varma]: and torment. That became the narrative of that entire series, despite the fact that
[Guest 1]: it had magnificent performances on both sides. It had one of the most magical days of cricket
[Guest 1]: when these two guys got together, Lakshman and Dravid got together and turned the series
[Guest 1]: on its head. What do we still remember? The first memory that comes is Sourav being late
[Guest 1]: for two test matches. And then when that becomes a thing, Sourav deliberately comes 10 minutes
[Guest 1]: early and stands there like, look at me. And, you know, we never, and remember that is two
[Guest 1]: of the best lots of players you had. You would expect that the narrative would have been
[Guest 1]: about how Steve Waugh will counter the Indian bowling or how Lakshman and Dravid and Tendulkar
[Guest 1]: and the others will counter the Aussie bowling led by Vaughan and Magra. And the other interesting
[Amit Varma]: thing about the mythology of Test cricket is that when India played Australia or India
[Amit Varma]: played Pakistan or you have an Asha series, all the players are almost sort of mythic
[Amit Varma]: figures. They've got their stories. They're part of that. While today what you have is
[Amit Varma]: with the preponderance of T20 leagues and so on. They're familiar to the extent where
[Amit Varma]: they no longer have the same aura, no matter how good they are. You know, I don't think
[Amit Varma]: a Steve Smith will ever have the kind of aura that say, Waugh had back then, simply because
[Guest 1]: we are so much more familiar with. Yeah. And T20, one of the points that Gideon made is
[Guest 1]: that you can't remember what happened last week. But that very thing, the same Test players
[Guest 1]: are also playing T20. They're playing in the IPL. They're playing in international T20s
[Guest 1]: and stuff like that. Somewhere along the way, their skills are getting trivialised. And
[Guest 1]: so I don't, I mean, I don't know how much of that aura that you're talking about. I
[Guest 1]: would still have if I'd seen, say, a Steve Waugh play T20 and a Mark Waugh play. We were
[Guest 1]: talking this morning about the styles of the stylistics of Mark Waugh and stuff like that.
[Guest 1]: You have them trotting out in coloured clothes and trying to make the first ball for a six
[Guest 1]: and stuff like that. And suddenly Mark Waugh is just human. You know, he's just not a guy.
[Guest 1]: But somewhere along the way, T20 is, to my way of looking at it, diminishing the mythical
[Guest 1]: aspect of some of these Test players.
[Amit Varma]: So having said that, tell me your reaction to this. And this is something which fellow
[Amit Varma]: cricket tragics often get shocked when I express. But I think, A, T20 is a completely different
[Amit Varma]: sport from Test cricket and it's unfair to compare them. And B, I think, what T20 cricket
[Amit Varma]: has done, what One Day Cricket did to a certain extent, but T20 cricket has done much more,
[Amit Varma]: is that it has given players new skill sets, which have even gone and enhanced the original
[Guest 2]: game.
[Guest 2]: Well, I think what it's done is it's changed the nature of skill. Previously, skill operated
[Guest 2]: on one axis, probably, let's say, a vertical axis. It was all about the ability to reproduce
[Guest 2]: certain core skills consistently to a very high standard. It was a relatively narrow
[Guest 2]: set of skills.
[Guest 2]: To be simple, do it well again and again.
[Guest 2]: Exactly. Glenn McGrath, perhaps the ultimate example, the bowler who could just land the
[Guest 2]: ball on a sixpence over and over again, do a little bit either way. Inherently kind of
[Guest 2]: undramatic cricketer, but with an amazingly robust mechanism and an endless patience.
[Guest 2]: Skill now works on a kind of a horizontal axis. It's a range of skills. Cricketers are
[Guest 2]: more skillful in the sense that they have more skills than perhaps they ever have before.
[Guest 2]: What they perhaps don't have is the robust mechanism that allows for their constant repetition.
[Guest 2]: The accent is now on variety rather than consistency, isn't it? It's the ability to access 360
[Guest 2]: degrees of the ground. It's the ability to bowl six different balls in and over so as
[Guest 2]: to maximise the disruption to the opponent's rhythm. You actually have two games now operating
[Guest 2]: at right angles to one another. It is amazing when you see the skills migrate from one format
[Guest 2]: to another.
[Guest 2]: I actually thought the World Cup in 2015 was utterly fascinating precisely because you
[Guest 2]: got test match quality bowling because the accent was on the only way to slow down batsmen
[Guest 2]: these days is to get them out. And T20 batting skills on show, and they both kind of meshed
[Guest 2]: to this new model of ODI cricket, which made it for a very heady brew. That's why I found
[Guest 2]: it such a compelling tournament to watch.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I often express the unpopular opinion that Virat Kohli is the most skilled Indian
[Amit Varma]: batsman there has ever been. And I felt pretty much the same about AB de Villiers in the
[Guest 1]: sense that he can do things that no batsman in history could have imagined.
[Guest 1]: I heard Gideon at a panel at the Bangalore Lit Festival. He made this point about having
[Guest 1]: talked to a lot of contemporary Australian players. I think he mentioned some 25 players
[Guest 1]: yesterday. And he was saying that one of the things that he found uniformly among these
[Guest 1]: players is that because of the breakdown of traditional structures, you're playing T20
[Guest 1]: as an international player, but you're also playing it for your club and for various clubs
[Guest 1]: around the world and stuff like that, that the players are no longer as invested in the
[Guest 1]: outcome of an individual match as they used to be. They don't suffer the defeats as much
[Guest 1]: and they don't, you know, celebrate the victories as much because there's another game coming
[Amit Varma]: along.
[Amit Varma]: Which I would argue as a former poker player is actually the correct attitude. You can't
[Guest 1]: be reserved for the entire process.
[Guest 1]: But then to your question, one of the fun things and I don't know how you will prove
[Guest 1]: this empirically, but if you're not invested in the result, then the fear of the result
[Guest 1]: is also taken away from your mind.
[Guest 1]: That takes away some of the drama.
[Guest 1]: No, but you're able to go out there and play without that fear. So where Gideon started
[Guest 1]: talking about, you know, doing the right thing and then just repeating it ad infinitum throughout
[Guest 1]: the day, that's no longer your mindset. Your mindset is, it's not about what I've been
[Guest 1]: trained to do. It is about doing exactly what I'm not expected to do. And that is adding
[Guest 1]: a certain richness to the vocabulary of cricket.
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, I think that you would bowl a full-toss deliberately.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but if Magra was bowling today, I think he would bowl exactly the same way and be
[Amit Varma]: as effective, if not more, why would he not? I mean, Magra, in fact, to me exemplifies
[Amit Varma]: that approach of process over results, where you just keep on doing the right thing and
[Amit Varma]: the results come by themselves.
[Guest 1]: But I would still love to see Magra going up against a Virat Kohli or a Naby De Villiers
[Amit Varma]: today.
[Amit Varma]: Who can just hit him off his neck.
[Guest 1]: No, also because he's so very predictable in where he's going to land the ball, give
[Guest 1]: it a centimetre to the left or a centimetre to the right. You can decide to go down the
[Guest 1]: wicket to him because you know what the length is going to be. You can decide to switch the
[Guest 1]: bat around and play him to angles that… Magra, when doing that, has never been challenged
[Guest 1]: in an unorthodox fashion. You play Magra orthodox and you will just keep… Magra versus Dravid
[Guest 1]: is the ultimate cricket thing because neither of them will…
[Amit Varma]: Be able from what they do.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest 2]: One thing I would say in Magra's favour, I suspect that as a great player, he would
[Guest 2]: have adapted to whatever circumstances offered. He was also incredibly psychologically strong
[Guest 2]: and that is something that is required of players these days. For a bowler to be able
[Guest 2]: to come back and bowl a good delivery, having been hit for six the previous ball, that requires
[Guest 2]: an immense poise and concentration and faith in one's own ability and I think Magra had
[Guest 2]: always that.
[Amit Varma]: So would it then be fair to say that if it is the case that Magra would have been challenged
[Guest 2]: more by contemporary batsmen and would have lifted himself accordingly, that the contemporary
[Amit Varma]: age of cricket has actually lifted the quality of play overall because people are challenged
[Amit Varma]: more and have to, you know, just using that particular example.
[Guest 2]: I think it has made players more brilliant and more brittle. I think it has made momentum
[Guest 2]: much more important. It is interesting to see how test teams just seem to disintegrate
[Guest 2]: now. How one team gets on top and the other side just falls away almost abjectly, pitifully.
[Amit Varma]: Because they are defiant because they are lost.
[Guest 2]: Yes, well they have got lots of skills but they have them only in one dimension and if
[Guest 2]: those skills don't work, they don't really seem to have much to fall back on.
[Guest 2]: I would be interested to see, there has been a lot of talk lately about how quickly games
[Guest 2]: are ending because of this advocacy of four-day test matches. I would be interested to see
[Guest 2]: what the trend is in margins in test matches. Certainly it is observably true over the last
[Guest 2]: 10 years that the margins in anxious test matches, both one way and the other, have
[Guest 2]: been just getting bigger and bigger and bigger. We are just not seeing close test matches
[Amit Varma]: anymore.
[Amit Varma]: That is really interesting. Going back to, you know, a classic batsman versus bowler
[Amit Varma]: struggle that I remember, Atherton versus Ronald. Would it then be fair to say that
[Amit Varma]: if in Atherton's place there was a modern day batsman, maybe Atherton himself had 10
[Amit Varma]: years of pre-20 cricket behind him, would his approach be different, A, and would his
[Amit Varma]: approach be better, B?
[Guest 2]: It is an interesting question. I have asked Mike this directly. I said that when you were
[Guest 2]: playing the game, there was no batting coach in the England set-up. How do you think he
[Guest 2]: would have used a batting coach? Do you think it would have made you any better player?
[Guest 2]: His answer was actually quite a thoughtful one. He said that towards the end of his career,
[Guest 2]: he had begun sort of fiddling almost compulsively with his tip-net, partly because of his bad
[Guest 2]: back, just to feel more comfortable with the crease. He said the most valuable coaching
[Guest 2]: advice that he ever received was just the reinforcement not to make changes, just to
[Guest 2]: rely on doing things simply to have faith in yourself, that degree of reinforcement.
[Guest 2]: It's interesting that a man as psychologically strong as Mike would have required that degree
[Guest 2]: of reinforcement, but that was something that he did feel that he'd missed out on.
[Guest 2]: Mike loved the batting. Mike loved resistance, since that is quite an old-fashioned quality
[Guest 2]: these days. Players want to lead the game. Players want to take the aggressive role.
[Guest 2]: Mike loved to withstand, and at his best, there was probably no one better. I suspect
[Guest 2]: that withstanding is something that's kind of enduring, like a rock in the face of erosion
[Guest 2]: is something that's kind of going by the board, because there is this constant accent
[Guest 2]: on enterprise, on taking control of the game, of forcing the game, imposing your will
[Amit Varma]: and imposing your momentum. And to be fair, in the shorter form of the game, aggression
[Amit Varma]: is just more positive. It just pays more than resilience does, and because players play
[Amit Varma]: so much more of that, that almost perhaps becomes reflexive to them, which is why I'm
[Amit Varma]: wondering if a modern-day batsman playing Donald like that would just say that,
[Amit Varma]: heck, I'm not going to try to survive five overs because he's really good, he's going
[Guest 2]: to get me, I'm just going to try and hit him out of the attack.
[Guest 2]: Interesting line in Peterson's last book, which I was reading just recently, he talked
[Guest 2]: about batting with Jonathan Trott, and he said that Trottie was kind of a bit of a figure
[Guest 2]: of fun in the England dressing room, or at least to bat with him, because he was constantly
[Guest 2]: talking in mid-pitch about how he was going to take the bowler on, how he was going to
[Guest 2]: hit him back over his head, how he was going to take the initiative, and he went back to
[Guest 2]: his end and he just went on playing the way that he always did. Peterson said, interestingly,
[Guest 2]: that at least that demonstrated a positive mindset, that even if he was getting into
[Guest 2]: position to play aggressive shots, even if he didn't actually play them, you're naturally
[Guest 2]: a better player if you're thinking positive thoughts. Even if you don't actually attack,
[Guest 2]: at least thinking of attack puts you into better shapes and makes you more resilient
[Guest 2]: under those circumstances.
[Amit Varma]: That's fascinating. I'd like to end by asking both of you two questions. Question one,
[Amit Varma]: what makes you more hopeful about the future of cricket? And question two, what gives you
[Amit Varma]: despair about what is happening in cricket today?
[Guest 2]: Well, the thing that always makes me hopeful about playing cricket is playing it. I play
[Guest 2]: for a club, I played for this same club for about 24 years, I'm the games record holder
[Guest 2]: there. I'm disappointed to be in Bangalore today because it means that I'm missing a
[Guest 2]: game this weekend. I love it more than ever. I love getting out there, I love my teammates,
[Guest 2]: I love the challenges that cricket throws up, I love the unique perspective that you
[Guest 2]: have as a player. There are certain insights that only the player has, that we as journalists
[Guest 2]: in our daily life will never have the same view of the game. I think that the love of
[Guest 2]: the game among those who play it is still abiding. And frankly, when I'm out there,
[Guest 2]: I'm just constantly surprised by what a great game it is, how uniquely satisfying, how uniquely
[Guest 2]: skillful, how uniquely fun and full of comradeship it is, how it can blend people from different
[Guest 2]: backgrounds, how it teaches respect for opponents, it teaches respect for officials. It humbles
[Guest 2]: you before it constantly, just at that very moment where you think you've got it mastered,
[Guest 2]: it turns around and bites you in the bum. The thing that cricket has going for it most
[Guest 2]: today is the game itself.
[Amit Varma]: And what makes you pessimistic?
[Guest 2]: My concern is the constant bending out of shape of the game by kind of exogenous factors,
[Guest 2]: by commercial agendas, by political and administrative ambition. And I don't detect in those constituencies
[Guest 2]: the same deep and abiding love that those who play the game have.
[Guest 1]: Prem?
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I happen to watch one particular day, actually three days of the recent India-Australia
[Guest 1]: test series in three different sports parts, partly because my wife threatened to throw
[Guest 1]: me out if I had cricket at volume. But what was striking was, you remember that rear guard
[Guest 1]: thing that Hanscom and Sean Marsh played? This was a young audience, it's a bar, and
[Guest 1]: kids, and they sat riveted through that entire thing, who'd have thought? And the audience
[Guest 1]: at the ground was transfixed by that thing. And it was absolutely brilliant because you
[Guest 1]: realise that for all the talk, and that audience would never have possibly seen some of the
[Guest 1]: great rear guards of even the Ataturnera and before that the Gavaskars and all the people
[Guest 1]: that we celebrated at our thing. Just the sheer contest, even though nothing was happening,
[Guest 1]: it was mostly just being played back to a field or whatever, the contest held them riveted
[Guest 1]: and somewhere I think that ultimately we look at a lot of external factors to explain what
[Guest 1]: may or may not happen to the game, and I think if the game just lifts itself up, I think
[Guest 1]: it has a future.
[Amit Varma]: What keeps you hopeful is that for just the inherent drama of the game itself?
[Guest 1]: Of the game itself, at its best it is one of the most entrancing thing, and I don't
[Guest 1]: mean the Sixers that are playing, I mean the contest.
[Guest 1]: Absolutely.
[Guest 1]: It has that narrative scope to it. What makes me despair, I'll take off from what Gideon
[Guest 1]: said, I think you look at what is happening in sports administration at the ICC level
[Guest 1]: or at the more civilised cricket boards like Australia for instance, and then the Dark
[Guest 1]: Ages of India, every single innovation, every single tweak and twist is all with a very
[Guest 1]: short-term gain in mind, and each one of these is independent of the other, sometimes contradictory
[Guest 1]: to the other, and it is not leading in an organised fashion to all the questions that
[Guest 1]: you have been concerned with in course of this. I don't see the administration asking
[Amit Varma]: itself those questions and addressing those questions.
[Guest 1]: I mean they are essentially just corporate suits.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, so why would you have Sri Lanka come back and tour again? I mean what possible
[Guest 1]: logic did you have? The only logic you had was, here is a broadcaster who has given us
[Amit Varma]: a stroke of money and we need to make him happy, therefore let's give him some message.
[Amit Varma]: And you dilute the drama and you also disillusion the players who are just waiting to see it.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, exactly. So, you know, where you were looking at a team that is all conquering and
[Guest 1]: you have built up the mythos around Virat and his invincibles, and you suddenly have
[Guest 1]: them playing school games. I am sorry, I mean I have full respect for Sri Lankan cricket,
[Guest 1]: but right now they happen to be unfortunately at a point of transition. They are not opposition.
[Guest 1]: They should be playing Zimbabwe and finding their way back. And you host them here for
[Guest 1]: longer than you are going to be in South Africa. And in what world that makes any kind of sense,
[Guest 1]: I don't know. So, if the game gives me hope, the administration of the game gives me total despair.
[Amit Varma]: So, we can end on a hopeful note that even if the administration of the game tries to
[Amit Varma]: take it backwards, we the fans will fight and we will flourish. Thank you so much for
[Amit Varma]: being on the show. Amen. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.